Rewrite Setup Gardener document (#11260)
gardener/gardener: docs/deployment/setup_gardener.md

>
>To make it more tangible, some choices are made to provide examples - specifically this guide uses OpenStack as infrastructure provider, Garden Linux to run any worker nodes, and Calico as CNI.
> Providing working examples for all combinations of components is out of scope. For a detailed descriptions of components, please refer to the [documentation](https://gardener.cloud/docs/) and [API reference](https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/).

## Target Picture

A Gardener landscape consists of several building blocks. The basis is an existing Kubernetes cluster which is referred to as *runtime* cluster.
Within this cluster another Kubernetes cluster is hosted, which is referred to as *virtual Garden* cluster. It is nodeless, meaning it does not host any pods as workload. The virtual Garden cluster is the management plane for the Gardener landscape and contains resources like `Shoots`, `Seeds` and so on.

Any new Gardener landscape starts with the deployment of the Gardener Operator and the creation of a `garden` namespace on the designated runtime cluster.

> With the operator in place, the `Garden` resource can be deployed. It is reconciled by the Gardener Operator, which will create the "virtual" Garden cluster with its `etcd`, `kube-api-server`, `gardener-apiserver`, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the operator in place, the `Garden` resource can be deployed. It is reconciled by the Gardener Operator, which will create the "virtual" Garden cluster with its `etcd`, `kube-apiserver`, `gardener-apiserver`, and so on.
```

> The API server is exposed through a LoadBalancer `Service` and a DNS record pointing to its external IP address is created.

Reviewer: Technically it is exposed via Istio, whose ingress is exposed via LoadBalancer service.

Author: addressed with a37e8e4b077f2b6ae111606124d82f0448377565

Once the `Garden` reports readiness, basic building blocks like `Cloudprofiles`, `ControllerDeployments`, and `ControllerRegistrations`, as well as `Secrets` granting access to DNS management for the internal domain and external default domain, are deployed to the virtual Garden cluster.

> To be able to host any `Shoots`, at least one `Seed` is required. The very first `Seed` is created via a `gardenlet` resource deployed to the virtual Garden cluster. The actual `gardenlet` `Pods` run on the runtime cluster or another Kubernetes cluster not managed by Gardener. Typically, this `Seed` is referred to as an __unmanaged__ `Seed` and is considered part of the Gardener infrastructure.

Reviewer: Why is seed capitalized but gardenlet is not?
```suggestion
To be able to host any `Shoots`, at least one `Seed` is required. The very first `Seed` is created via a `Gardenlet` resource deployed to the virtual Garden cluster. The actual `gardenlet` `Pods` run on the runtime cluster or another Kubernetes cluster not managed by Gardener. Typically, this `Seed` is referred to as an __unmanaged__ `Seed` and is considered part of the Gardener infrastructure.
```

As there are other resources named `gardenlet`, e.g. the deployment, maybe the gardenlet resource should be mentioned with its full name `gardenlets.seedmanagement.gardener.cloud`.

Reference documentation:

- [Gardener Architecture](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/architecture.md)
- [Gardener concepts](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/tree/master/docs#concepts)

In this example, the runtime cluster is also used to host the very first `gardenlet`, which will register this cluster as a `Seed` as well. The `gardenlet` can be deployed to another Kubernetes cluster (recommended for productive setups). Here, using the runtime cluster keeps the amount of unmanaged clusters at a bare minimum.

### DNS Zone

The virtual Garden API endpoint (`kube-apiserver`) is exposed through a LoadBalancer `Service` and its IP address is made discoverable through DNS. Hence, a zone where an `A` record can be created is required.

Additionally, Gardener advertises `kube-apiservers` of `Shoots` through two DNS records, which requires at least one DNS zone and credentials to interact with it through automation.

> Assuming the base domain for a Gardener landscape is `gardener.crazy-botany.cloud`, the following example shows a possible way to structure DNS records:

Reviewer: Let's keep the TLD `gardener.cloud`. 

```suggestion
Assuming the base domain for a Gardener landscape is `crazy-botany.gardener.cloud`, the following example shows a possible way to structure DNS records:
```

| Component                | General                                            | Example                                              |
|:-------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
| Gardener Base            | gardener.\<showroom-base-domain\>                  | gardener.crazy-botany.cloud                          |
| Virtual Garden           | api.garden.\<gardener-base-domain\>                | api.garden.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud               |
| Gardener Ingress         | ingress.garden\<gardener-base-domain\>             | ingress.garden.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud           |

> | Gardener Dashboard       | dashboard.ingress.\<gardener-base-domain\>         | dashboard.ingress.garden.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud |

Reviewer: Please, add also the discovery server domain. It is unconditionally deployed by GOP and used to expose public information of Gardener and Shoot clusters (CA certs and OIDC discovery metadata as of now).
```suggestion
| Gardener Dashboard       | dashboard.ingress.\<gardener-base-domain\>         | dashboard.ingress.garden.crazy-botany.gardener.cloud |
| Gardener Discovery       | discovery.ingress.\<gardener-base-domain\>         | dashboard.ingress.garden.crazy-botany.gardener.cloud |
```

| Shoot Internal           | internal.\<gardener-base-domain\>                  | internal.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud                 |
| Shoot (default) External | shoot.\<gardener-base-domain\>                     | shoot.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud                    |
| Unmanaged Seed Ingress   | ingress.soil.\<gardener-base-domain\>              | ingress.soil.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud             |
| Managed Seed             | \<seed-name>.seed.\<gardener-base-domain\>         | cc-ha.seed.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud               |
| Managed Seed Ingress     | ingress.\<seed-name>.seed.\<gardener-base-domain\> | ingress.cc-ha.seed.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud       |

Reference documentation:

- [Gardener Configuration](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/operations/configuration.md#system-configuration)
- [DNS records](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/extensions/resources/dnsrecord.md)

### Backup Bucket

> The virtual Garden cluster's `etcd` is governed by [etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid). Backups are created continuously and stored to a supported object store. Credentials to manage an object store on the chosen infrastructure are required.

Reviewer: If I am not mistaken, etcd backup is optional, but recommended for productive installations of Gardener.

Author: Thanks for the hint. Addressed with a37e8e4b077f2b6ae111606124d82f0448377565

### Infrastructure

For each infrastructure supported by Gardener a so-called `provider-extension` exists. It implements the required interfaces. For this example, the [openstack extension](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack) will be used.

Access to the respective infrastructure is required and needs to be handed over to Gardener in the provider-specific format (e.g., Openstack application credentials).

Reference documentation:

- [Gardener extensibility](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/tree/master/docs#extensions)

> - [Provider openstack](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack/tree/master/docs)

Reviewer: Can you use relative links here?

Author: makes sense :) thanks! Done throughout the document.

            memory: 256Mi
  resources:
  - kind: BackupBucket
    type: openstack
  - kind: BackupEntry
    type: openstack
  - kind: Bastion
    type: openstack
  - kind: ControlPlane
    type: openstack
  - kind: Infrastructure
    type: openstack
  - kind: Worker
    type: openstack
  - kind: DNSRecord
    type: openstack-designate
```

To make use of the automated DNS management, the `Garden` resource has to contain a primary provider. Here is an example for an Openstack-based setup, where the actual credentials are stored in the referenced `Secret`:

```yaml
dns:
  providers:
  - name: primary
    type: openstack-designate
    secretRef:
      name: dns-showroom-garden
```

Additionally, the `BackupBucket` and credentials to access it are configured alongside. The easiest way to get started is by using and customizing the example linked below.

![Garden](./content/garden.png)

Upon the first reconciliation of the `Garden` resource, a Kubernetes control plane will be bootstrapped in the `garden` namespace. `etcd-main` and `etcd-events` are managed by [etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) and use the `BackupBucket` created by the `provider-extension`.

> To be able to serve any Gardener resource, the `gardener-apiserver` is deployed and registered through an `Apiservice` resource with the `kube-apiserver` of the virtual Garden cluster. Components like `gardener-scheduler` and `gardener-controller-manager` are deployed to act on Gardener's resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to serve any Gardener resource, the `gardener-apiserver` is deployed and registered through an `APIService` resource with the `kube-apiserver` of the virtual Garden cluster. Components like `gardener-scheduler` and `gardener-controller-manager` are deployed to act on Gardener's resources.
```

Once the `Garden` resource reports readiness, the virtual Garden cluster can be targeted.

```shell
kubectl get garden crazy-botany

NAME          K8S VERSION   GARDENER VERSION   LAST OPERATION   RUNTIME   VIRTUAL   API SERVER   OBSERVABILITY   AGE
crazy-botany   1.31.1        v1.110.0           Succeeded        True      True      True         True            1d
```

In case the automatic DNS record creation is not supported, a record with the external address of the `virtual-garden-istio-ingress` (found in namespace `istio-ingressgateway`) service has to be created manually.

> To obtain credentials and interact with the virtual Garden cluster, please follow this [guide](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/operator.md#virtual-garden-kubeconfig).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To obtain credentials and interact with the virtual Garden cluster, please follow this [guide](../concepts/operator.md#virtual-garden-kubeconfig).
```

- [DNS service](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-shoot-dns-service)
- [Cert service](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-shoot-cert-service)
- [OIDC service](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-shoot-oidc-service)

Reference documentation:
- [Extension Contract](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/extensions/resources/extension.md#contract-extension-resource)
- [GEP 01 Extensibility](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/proposals/01-extensibility.md)
- [Extension Library](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/tree/master/extensions#known-extension-implementations)

#### How to install an extension

In order to make an extension known to a Gardener landscape, two resources have to be applied to the virtual Garden cluster - firstly, a `ControllerDeployment` and secondly, a matching `ControllerRegistration`. With both in place, Gardener-managed `ControllerInstallations` take care of the actual deployment of the extension to the target environment.

Check the [controller registration documentation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/extensions/controllerregistration.md) for more details.

> Now, the classical way of installing `ControllerDeployment` and `ControllerRegistration` is to prepare the resources and apply them to the virtual Garden cluster. Please note, the `ControllerDeployment` contains a base64 encoded archive of extension's helm chart.

Reviewer: > Please note, the `ControllerDeployment` contains a base64 encoded archive of extension's helm chart

Since v1 version of ControllerDeployment it is possible to use helm charts stored in oci repository, and this was made backward compatible with v1beta1. See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/example/25-controllerdeployment.yaml

Author: Adapted with a37e8e4b077f2b6ae111606124d82f0448377565

For example, to deploy the [provider Openstack](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack) extension, the [example file](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack/blob/master/example/controller-registration.yaml) can be used.

To simplify this procedure, extensions can be registered through `Extension` resources in the runtime cluster. The Gardener Operator will take care of deploying the required resources to the virtual Garden cluster.
In addition, this approach allows the extensions and their admission controllers to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well. There, they can provide additional functionality like creating DNS records or `BackupBuckets`.
More details can be found in the [Extension Resource documentation](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/operator.md#extension-resource).

![extensions](./content/extensions.png)

### Cloud Profile

> In order to host any `Shoot` cluster, at least one `CloudProfile` is required. The resource describes supported Kubernetes and OS versions, as well as infrastructure capabilities like regions and their availability zones.

Reviewer: Just to make it more clear in the beginning that the `CloudProfile` is the resource type.
```suggestion
In order to host any `Shoot` cluster, at least one `CloudProfile` is required. The `CloudProfile` resource describes supported Kubernetes and OS versions, as well as infrastructure capabilities like regions and their availability zones.
```

Hence, the next step is to craft a `CloudProfile` for each infrastructure provider and combine it with the information where the operating system images can be found. The resulting `CloudProfile` resource has to be deployed to the virtual Garden cluster.

The following list provides the high-level steps to build a `CloudProfile`:

- add at least one supported minor version to `.spec.kubernetes.versions[]`.
- add at least one region including the availability zone to `.spec.regions[]`
- add at least one operating system to `.spec.machineImages[]` and define at least on supported version.
- add one or several machine types to `.spec.machineTypes[]`
- specify a `.spec.providerConfig` according to the extension's documentation. Typically, this includes a list of `MachineImages`. Garden Linux, for example, publishes images and provides a list of location as part of the release notes. In case of private infrastructure, copying the images might be required.

Here is a simplified example manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: CloudProfile
metadata:
  name: openstack-example
spec:

>   caBundle: |

Reviewer: I think it will be nice to add short explanation of each field that is not mentioned before or is not obvious 
```suggestion
  caBundle: | # CA Bundle installed on all nodes of the shoot clusters using this CloudProfile
```

    <redacted>
  kubernetes:
    versions:
    - classification: preview
      version: 1.31.3
    - classification: supported
      expirationDate: "2025-07-30T23:59:59Z"
      version: 1.31.2
  machineImages:
  - name: gardenlinux
    updateStrategy: minor
    versions:
    - architectures:
      - amd64
      - arm64
      classification: supported
      cri:
      - containerRuntimes:
        - type: gvisor
        name: containerd
      version: 1592.3.0
  machineTypes:
  - architecture: amd64
    cpu: "2"
    gpu: "0"
    memory: 4Gi
    name: small_machine
    storage:
      class: standard
      size: 64Gi
      type: default
    usable: true
  regions:
  - name: my-region-1
    zones:
    - name: my-region-1a
    - name: my-region-1b
  providerConfig:
    apiVersion: openstack.provider.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: CloudProfileConfig
    machineImages:
    - name: gardenlinux
      versions:
      - version: 1592.3.0
        regions:

>         - id: abcd-1234

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - id: abcd-1234 # The ID of the image in the given OpenStack installation for the specified region.
```

Reference documentation:

- [DNS records](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/extensions/resources/dnsrecord.md#what-does-gardener-create-dns-records-for)
- [Default domain example](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/example/10-secret-default-domain.yaml)
- [Internal domain example](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/example/10-secret-internal-domain.yaml)

### Gardenlet

Before the first `Shoot` can be created in a new Gardener landscape, at least one `Seed` is required. The very first `Seed` is typically created by deploying a properly configured `gardenlet` to an existing Kubernetes cluster. In this example, the `gardenlet` will be deployed to the runtime cluster - effectively turning it into a `Seed` as well.
It is also possible (and strongly recommended for larger installations) to deploy a `gardenlet` to another cluster thus separating virtual Garden cluster and the first `Seed` with the control planes hosted there.

> For the `gardenlet` to function properly, it needs a `provider-extension` matching its configuration to create a `BackupBucket`, as well as valid infrastructure credentials. A `Secret` with the credentials needs to be created in the virtual Garden cluster and linked in the `gardenlet`'s configuration.

Reviewer: Hm, again the backup should be optional. I am not sure, but I think this is not gardenlet but seed configuration (even though the 1:1 relation of seed and gardenlet, I think it is better to not describe it as gardenlet configuration).

Author: Addressed with a37e8e4b077f2b6ae111606124d82f0448377565

# How to Set Up a Gardener Landscape

> [!IMPORTANT]
> __DISCLAIMER__
> This document outlines the building blocks used to set up a Gardener landscape. It is not meant as a comprehensive configuration guide but rather as a starting point. Setting up a landscape requires careful planning and consideration of dimensions like the number of providers, geographical distribution, and envisioned size.
>

> >To make it more tangible, some choices are made to provide examples - specifically this guide uses OpenStack as infrastructure provider, Garden Linux to run any worker nodes, and Calico as CNI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To make it more tangible, some choices are made to provide examples - specifically this guide uses OpenStack as infrastructure provider, Garden Linux to run any worker nodes, and Calico as CNI.
```

> Providing working examples for all combinations of components is out of scope. For a detailed descriptions of components, please refer to the [documentation](https://gardener.cloud/docs/) and [API reference](https://gardener.cloud/docs/gardener/api-reference/).

## Target Picture

A Gardener landscape consists of several building blocks. The basis is an existing Kubernetes cluster which is referred to as *runtime* cluster.
Within this cluster another Kubernetes cluster is hosted, which is referred to as *virtual Garden* cluster. It is nodeless, meaning it does not host any pods as workload. The virtual Garden cluster is the management plane for the Gardener landscape and contains resources like `Shoots`, `Seeds` and so on.

Any new Gardener landscape starts with the deployment of the Gardener Operator and the creation of a `garden` namespace on the designated runtime cluster.

With the operator in place, the `Garden` resource can be deployed. It is reconciled by the Gardener Operator, which will create the "virtual" Garden cluster with its `etcd`, `kube-apiserver`, `gardener-apiserver`, and so on.

> The API server is exposed through an Istio `Gateway` and a DNS record pointing to the `Gateway's` external IP address is created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The API server is exposed through an Istio `Gateway` and a DNS record pointing to the `Gateway`'s external IP address is created.
```

> Once the `Garden` reports readiness, basic building blocks like `Cloudprofiles`, `ControllerDeployments`, and `ControllerRegistrations`, as well as `Secrets` granting access to DNS management for the internal domain and external default domain, are deployed to the virtual Garden cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the `Garden` reports readiness, basic building blocks like `CloudProfile`s, `ControllerDeployment`s, and `ControllerRegistration`s, as well as `Secret`s granting access to DNS management for the internal domain and external default domain, are deployed to the virtual Garden cluster.
```

> To be able to host any `Shoots`, at least one `Seed` is required. The very first `Seed` is created via a `Gardenlet` resource (more precisely `gardenlets.seedmanagement.gardener.cloud`) deployed to the virtual Garden cluster. The actual `gardenlet` `Pods` run on the runtime cluster or another Kubernetes cluster not managed by Gardener. Typically, this `Seed` is referred to as an __unmanaged__ `Seed` and is considered part of the Gardener infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To be able to host any `Shoot`s, at least one `Seed` is required. The very first `Seed` is created via a `Gardenlet` resource (more precisely `gardenlets.seedmanagement.gardener.cloud`) deployed to the virtual Garden cluster. The actual `gardenlet` pods run on the runtime cluster or another Kubernetes cluster not managed by Gardener. Typically, this is referred to as an __unmanaged__ Seed and is considered part of the Gardener infrastructure.
```

> In this setup, the very first `Seed` will not be responsible for hosting end-user `Shoot` clusters. Instead, it will be reserved for one or several "infrastructure" `Shoots`. Those will be turned into `Seeds` again through a `ManagedSeed` resource. These __Gardener-managed__ `Seeds` will then host control planes of any users' `Shoot` clusters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this setup, the very first `Seed` will be reserved for one or several "infrastructure" `Shoot`s. Those will be turned into `Seed`s again through a `ManagedSeed` resource. These __Gardener-managed__ Seeds will then host control planes of any users' `Shoot` clusters.
```

![Gardener Setup](./content/gardener-setup.png)

Reference documentation:
- [Getting Started](https://gardener.cloud/docs/getting-started/architecture/)

## Prerequisites

> ### Runtime cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Runtime Cluster
```

## Configure and deploy components

This section focuses on the individual building blocks of a Gardener landscape and their deployment / options.

### Gardener Operator

The Gardener Operator is provided as a [helm chart](../../charts/gardener/operator), which is also published as an OCI artifact and attached to each release of the [gardener/gardener](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/releases) repository.

When setting up a new Gardener landscape, choose the latest version and either install the chart or render the templates e.g.:

```bash
helm template ./charts/gardener/operator --namespace garden --set replicaCount=2 --set image.tag=v1.111.0
```

Reference documentation:

- [Gardener Operator](../concepts/operator.md)

### Garden

The Gardener Operator reconciles the so-called `Garden` resource, which contains a detailed configuration of the Garden landscape to be created. Specify the domain name for the Garden's API endpoint, CIDR blocks for the virtual cluster, high availability, and other options here.
To get familiar with the available options, check the [Garden example](../../example/operator/20-garden.yaml).

> While most operations are carried out in the realm of the runtime cluster, two external services are required. To automate both the creation of DNS records and a `BackupBucket`, a `provider-extension` needs to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While most operations are carried out in the realm of the runtime cluster, two external services are required. To automate both the creation of `DNSRecord`s and a `BackupBucket`, a provider-extension needs to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well.
```

> While most operations are carried out in the realm of the runtime cluster, two external services are required. To automate both the creation of DNS records and a `BackupBucket`, a `provider-extension` needs to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While most operations are carried out in the realm of the runtime cluster, two external services are required. To automate both the creation of DNS records and a `BackupBucket`, a provider-extension needs to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well.
```

      runtimeClusterValues:
        vpa:
          enabled: true
          resourcePolicy:
            minAllowed:
              memory: 128Mi
          updatePolicy:
            updateMode: Auto
      values:
        replicaCount: 3
        resources:
          requests:
            cpu: 30m
            memory: 256Mi
  resources:
  - kind: BackupBucket
    type: openstack
  - kind: BackupEntry
    type: openstack
  - kind: Bastion
    type: openstack
  - kind: ControlPlane
    type: openstack
  - kind: Infrastructure
    type: openstack
  - kind: Worker
    type: openstack
  - kind: DNSRecord
    type: openstack-designate
```

To make use of the automated DNS management, the `Garden` resource has to contain a primary provider. Here is an example for an Openstack-based setup, where the actual credentials are stored in the referenced `Secret`:

```yaml
dns:
  providers:
  - name: primary
    type: openstack-designate
    secretRef:
      name: dns-showroom-garden
```

Additionally, the `BackupBucket` and credentials to access it are configured alongside. The easiest way to get started is by using and customizing the example linked below.

![Garden](./content/garden.png)

> Upon the first reconciliation of the `Garden` resource, a Kubernetes control plane will be bootstrapped in the `garden` namespace. `etcd-main` and `etcd-events` are managed by [etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) and use the `BackupBucket` created by the `provider-extension`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upon the first reconciliation of the `Garden` resource, a Kubernetes control plane will be bootstrapped in the `garden` namespace. `etcd-main` and `etcd-events` are managed by [etcd-druid](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid) and use the `BackupBucket` created by the provider-extension.
```

crazy-botany   1.31.1        v1.110.0           Succeeded        True      True      True         True            1d
```

In case the automatic DNS record creation is not supported, a record with the external address of the `virtual-garden-istio-ingress` (found in namespace `istio-ingressgateway`) service has to be created manually.

To obtain credentials and interact with the virtual Garden cluster, please follow this [guide](../concepts/operator.md#virtual-garden-kubeconfig).

Reference documentation and examples:

- [Garden configuration example](../../example/operator/20-garden.yaml)
- [Backup secret examples](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/tree/master/example/storage-provider-secrets)
- [Configuration options](../concepts/operator.md#garden-resources)
- [Accessing the virtual Garden](../concepts/operator.md#virtual-garden-kubeconfig)

### Extensions

Gardener is provider-agnostic and relies on a growing set of extensions. An extension can provide support for an infrastructure (required) or add a desired feature to a Kubernetes cluster (often optional).

There are a few extensions considered essential to any Gardener installation:

> - at least one [infrastructure provider](../../extensions/README.md#infrastructure-provider)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- at least one [infrastructure provider](../../extensions/README.md#infrastructure-provider) (AKA provider-extension)
```

Check the [controller registration documentation](../extensions/controllerregistration.md) for more details.

Now, the classical way of installing `ControllerDeployment` and `ControllerRegistration` is to prepare the resources and apply them to the virtual Garden cluster. The `ControllerDeployment` references an OCI repository containing the extension's helm chart.

For example, to deploy the [provider Openstack](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack) extension, the [example file](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack/blob/master/example/controller-registration.yaml) can be used.

To simplify this procedure, extensions can be registered through `Extension` resources in the runtime cluster. The Gardener Operator will take care of deploying the required resources to the virtual Garden cluster.

> In addition, this approach allows the extensions and their admission controllers to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well. There, they can provide additional functionality like creating DNS records or `BackupBuckets`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, this approach allows the extensions and their admission controllers to be deployed to the runtime cluster as well. There, they can provide additional functionality like managing `DNSRecord`s or `BackupBuckets`.
```

More details can be found in the [Extension Resource documentation](../concepts/operator.md#extension-resource).

![extensions](./content/extensions.png)

### Cloud Profile

In order to host any `Shoot` cluster, at least one `CloudProfile` is required. The `CloudProfile` resource describes supported Kubernetes and OS versions, as well as infrastructure capabilities like regions and their availability zones.

Hence, the next step is to craft a `CloudProfile` for each infrastructure provider and combine it with the information where the operating system images can be found. The resulting `CloudProfile` resource has to be deployed to the virtual Garden cluster.

The following list provides the high-level steps to build a `CloudProfile`:

- add at least one supported minor version to `.spec.kubernetes.versions[]`.

> - add at least one region including the availability zone to `.spec.regions[]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- add at least one region including the availability zone to `.spec.regions[]`.
```

- add at least one operating system to `.spec.machineImages[]` and define at least on supported version.

> - add one or several machine types to `.spec.machineTypes[]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- add one or several machine types to `.spec.machineTypes[]`.
```

    <redacted>
  kubernetes:
    versions:
    - classification: preview
      version: 1.31.3
    - classification: supported
      expirationDate: "2025-07-30T23:59:59Z"
      version: 1.31.2
  machineImages:
  - name: gardenlinux
    updateStrategy: minor
    versions:
    - architectures:
      - amd64
      - arm64
      classification: supported
      cri:
      - containerRuntimes:
        - type: gvisor
        name: containerd
      version: 1592.3.0
  machineTypes:
  - architecture: amd64
    cpu: "2"
    gpu: "0"
    memory: 4Gi
    name: small_machine
    storage:
      class: standard
      size: 64Gi
      type: default
    usable: true
  regions:
  - name: my-region-1
    zones:
    - name: my-region-1a
    - name: my-region-1b
  providerConfig:
    apiVersion: openstack.provider.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: CloudProfileConfig
    machineImages:
    - name: gardenlinux
      versions:
      - version: 1592.3.0
        regions:
        - id: abcd-1234 # The ID of the image in the given OpenStack installation for the specified region.
          name: my-region-1
    # ...
 ```

Reference documentation:

> - [Cloud profiles](../concepts/apiserver.md#cloudprofiles)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`CloudProfile`s](../concepts/apiserver.md#cloudprofiles)
```

> - [Cloud profile example](../../example/30-cloudprofile.yaml)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`CloudProfile` example](../../example/30-cloudprofile.yaml)
```

> - [Openstack cloud profile example](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack/blob/master/docs/operations/operations.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Openstack `CloudProfile` example](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-openstack/blob/master/docs/operations/operations.md)
```

- [Garden Linux release notes example](https://github.com/gardenlinux/gardenlinux/releases/tag/1592.3)
- [Image vector](../deployment/image_vector.md)
- [Image vector container defaults](../../imagevector/containers.yaml)

### DNS setup for internal & external domains

Gardener maintains DNS records for a `Shoot` which requires a DNS zone and credentials to manage records in this zone. Provide the credentials alongside with information about the zone. The secrets are deployed to the virtual Garden cluster.

Reference documentation:

> - [DNS records](../extensions/resources/dnsrecord.md#what-does-gardener-create-dns-records-for)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`DNSRecord`s](../extensions/resources/dnsrecord.md#what-does-gardener-create-dns-records-for)
```

- [Default domain example](../../example/10-secret-default-domain.yaml)
- [Internal domain example](../../example/10-secret-internal-domain.yaml)

### Gardenlet

Before the first `Shoot` can be created in a new Gardener landscape, at least one `Seed` is required. Typically, the very first `Seed` is created by deploying a properly configured `gardenlet` to an existing Kubernetes cluster. In this example, the `gardenlet` will be deployed to the runtime cluster - effectively turning it into a `Seed` as well. 
Thus, the runtime cluster serves two purposes now - it hosts the virtual Garden cluster and control planes. It is possible, and strongly recommended for larger installations, to deploy a `gardenlet` to another cluster. This separates the virtual Garden cluster from the first `Seed` with the control planes hosted there.

> For the `Seed` to function properly, a `provider-extension` matching the target infrastructure is required. Alongside, valid infrastructure credentials have to be provided. A `Secret` with the credentials needs to be created in the virtual Garden cluster and linked in the `gardenlet`'s configuration. If configured (`spec.backup`), the `Seed` will get a dedicated `BackupBucket` to store `etcd` backups.

Reviewer 2: This section might be a bit fussy. The seed needs the provider-extension and credentials to create a `DNSRecords` for its ingress domain as well as the `BackupBucket`s for the ETCDs of the shoot control-planes it will host.

Author: Clarified with 97c5dd81730c4ae2e82e2819092159838517a373

```yaml
spec:
  tolerations:
  - key: seed.gardener.cloud/protected
```

Up next, a `gardenlet` has to be installed on to this `Shoot` and it needs to be registered as a `Seed`. The recommended way is to create a `ManagedSeed` resource in the virtual Garden. The configuration for the `Seed` needs to be crafted carefully to avoid overlapping CIDR ranges etc. Additionally, the virtual Garden's API endpoint needs to be added. When deploying a `gardenlet` to the runtime cluster, cluster-internal communication through the `Service`'s cluster DNS record works well. Now with the new `gardenlet` running on a different Kubernetes cluster, the public endpoint is required in the `gardenlet`'s configuration within the `ManagedSeed` resource.

```yaml
spec:
  gardenlet:
    config:
      apiVersion: gardenlet.config.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
      kind: GardenletConfiguration
      gardenClientConnection:

>         gardenClusterAddress: https://api.garden.gardener.crazy-botany.cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        gardenClusterAddress: https://api.garden.crazy-botany.gardener.cloud
```

Author: missed that one 😞 thanks for spotting!
